# 0.1. Data

Data is often referred to as the fuel for Machine Learning, and although this course focuses on MLOps, it's crucial to have access to data to fully grasp the various concepts and technologies involved.

## Types of Data

When mentionning data, the first point is perhaps what are we talking about. When exploiting the model, data will be required at every step and will take many forms, be stored on different supports and will have different properties.

Briefly we can note the following data types:

### Structured Data
Data that have a predefine data model and that can be easily search and organize.

* *Tabular*: 
    * Perhaps the most common type of data, where data is organize in rows and columns.
    * Column are homogeneous in terms of types
    * Typically CSV files and Relational database 
* *Time Series*:
    * sequence of data points collected or recorded at successive points in time, usually at consistent intervals. This type of data is characterized by its temporal order, meaning the sequence of observations is crucial, and changing the order could alter the meaning or interpretation of the data. 
    * typically, financial data and energy
* *Geospatial*:
    * 
* *Graph*
    * 


### Unstructured Data
Data without a predefined model, which makes it complex to process

* *Text*:
* *Multimedia*:

### Semi Structured Data
Data that does not conform to the structure of structured data but still contains tags or other markers to separate semantic elements and enforce hierarchies of records and fields.


## Data Sources



## Which data should I use?

The question of which dataset to use is common, and honestly, the best dataset is the one you're most familiar with. Despite the vast array of data types and the diverse applications they support, many MLOps concepts are applicable across different domains, allowing for a level of abstraction from specific applications.

We will look into the specificities of certain types of applications later in the course. For now, we offer two options for getting started.

### Option 1: Use your own dataset (recommended)

You are encouraged to use your own dataset for this training.

Your goal is to run the steps for yourself, it will be even better on your own data.

### Option 2: Use a dataset from Kaggle

If you don't have a dataset to experiment on, we propose to use the following dataset:

- Name: House Prices - Advanced Regression Techniques
- Source: https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/house-prices-advanced-regression-techniques/overview

TODO:
- Present the datasets: size, columns, objective, ...
