---
description: Leverage our specialized MLOps Coding Assistant for real-time support, tailored responses, and code feedback. This AI-powered assistant is your companion throughout your MLOps learning journey.
---

# 0.5. Assistants

## What is the course assistant?

Included in this course is a premium [MLOps Coding Assistant](https://mlops-coding-assistant.fmind.dev/), specifically configured to support your learning journey by answering queries and tailoring the course content to your needs. This assistant functions similarly to ChatGPT but is uniquely customized to engage with the topics and materials of this course.

## How does this assistant work?

The assistant utilizes a [Large Language Model (LLM)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large_language_model) in a [Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) architecture](https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/what-is-retrieval-augmented-generation/) to offer real-time support and customized feedback. Upon receiving a query or request for assistance, it applies sophisticated natural language understanding to interpret your input accurately. It then consults its comprehensive database to fetch relevant information or examples, aiming to deliver the most precise and useful responses.

This tool is consistently updated to reflect the latest developments in AI and machine learning, ensuring it remains an effective resource throughout your MLOps educational journey. Whether you need further explanation on a topic, examples of MLOps applications, or feedback on your code, this assistant is prepared to assist.

## How much does the assistant cost?

The assistant is a complimentary feature that costs $10 per month. You can access it by contacting the [course creators](mailto:mlops-coding-course@fmind.dev). This fee grants you access to the assistant for one month, enabling you to leverage its support whenever you require assistance or guidance during the course.

## How should you use the assistant?

The assistant is available for a wide range of course-related inquiries. Consider using it in the following ways:

- **Demonstrating Examples:** Request detailed examples, such as a pipeline example for PyTorch, to deepen your comprehension of key concepts.
- **Feature Creation Guidance:** Seek advice on developing features for your dataset, utilizing the assistant's insights to refine your project.
- **Understanding Best Practices:** Query about the benefits of implementing unit tests or other MLOps best practices to enhance your learning.

The assistant can also perform code reviews, providing critiques and recommendations to elevate the caliber and effectiveness of your work.

## Can you fully trust the assistant?

While the assistant aims to offer accurate and relevant responses, it's essential to critically evaluate its outputs. It is estimated that about 90% of the information it generates will be accurate, but there is still a margin for potential errors or contextually unsuitable suggestions due to the limitations of generative AI technologies.

For those looking for a more dependable source of information, or to complement AI's convenience with expert human insight, the [human mentoring](./0.4. Mentoring.md) service is an excellent alternative. This option extends the assistant's support by providing personalized feedback and expert insights from seasoned professionals in the field.
