# 2.3. Options

## What are options?

Options in a data science environment, such as a Jupyter notebook, are configurations that tailor the behavior and appearance of libraries like pandas, matplotlib, and scikit-learn. These options allow you to control aspects like display settings and output formats.

Example of options in a notebook:

```python
# Pandas
pd.options.display.max_rows = None
pd.options.display.max_columns = None
# Sklearn
set_config(transform_output="pandas")
```

## Why do I need to pass options?

Default settings of libraries may not always align with your specific needs. For example:
- Pandas may hide some columns or rows by default, limiting the visibility of data.
- Matplotlib's default figure sizes might be too small for detailed analysis.

Adjusting these options ensures your environment is optimized for your workflow.

## How should I configure Pandas options?

Pandas offers a variety of options for customizing data display. Check the [Pandas Options and Settings documentation](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/options.html) for a comprehensive guide.

```python
import pandas as pd

# Set the maximum number of rows and columns to display
pd.options.display.max_rows = None
pd.options.display.max_columns = None
# Extend the maximum column width for display
pd.options.display.max_colwidth= None
```

## How should I configure matplotlib options?

Matplotlib's appearance can be customized as per your requirements. Refer to the [Matplotlib Customizing Guide](https://matplotlib.org/stable/users/explain/customizing.html) for detailed options.

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

# Set default figure size
plt.rcParams['figure.figsize'] = (20, 10)
```

## How should I configure scikit-learn options?

Scikit-learn provides configurations to modify how outputs are displayed or handled. The [official documentation](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.set_config.html#sklearn.set_config) outlines these options.

```python
import sklearn

# return pandas dataframe instead of numpy array
sklearn.set_config(transform_output='pandas')
```

Setting these options at the beginning of your notebook ensures a consistent and tailored working environment throughout your analysis.