# 1.2. pyenv

## What is pyenv?

Pyenv is a powerful tool designed to manage multiple Python versions on a single system. It solves a common problem developers face: the need to work on several projects simultaneously, each requiring a different Python version. With pyenv, you can easily switch between Python versions, ensuring that each project operates within its required environment without interfering with the system-wide Python installation or other projects.

## Why should I use pyenv?

Choosing pyenv as your Python version management tool comes with numerous advantages:

- **Flexibility**: Pyenv provides the ability to manage and switch between multiple Python versions with ease, catering to the specific needs of different projects.
- **Non-root Installation**: It allows the installation of Python versions without the need for system-wide changes or administrator rights, making it ideal for users who do not have root access.
- **Independence from System Python**: By managing Python versions at the user level, pyenv helps to avoid conflicts with the Python version installed by your operating system, ensuring a more stable and controlled development environment.

## How to install pyenv on my computer?

To install pyenv, you should refer to the official pyenv GitHub repository, where you'll find comprehensive installation instructions tailored for various operating systems. These guides ensure that you can set up pyenv on your system smoothly, regardless of your OS.

## Is there a specific setup for MLOps projects?

For MLOps projects, the primary setup consideration with pyenv is ensuring that the Python version you choose is compatible with the libraries and frameworks your project depends on. Beyond selecting the appropriate Python version, there are no special setup requirements unique to MLOps.

## How to install the required version of Python for my project?

To install a specific Python version, such as Python 3.12, with pyenv, use the command:

```bash
pyenv install 3.12
```

This command downloads and installs Python 3.12, making it available for your projects.

## How can I select the version of Python to install for my project?

To specify a Python version for your project, follow these steps:

1. Navigate to your project's root directory.
2. Create a `.python-version` file and include the desired Python version number (e.g., `3.12`) in it.

```text
3.12
```

3. With pyenv configured and active, the Python environment will automatically switch to the version specified in the `.python-version` file when you enter the project directory.

```bash
# To confirm the currently active Python version
$ python --version`
```

If the version doesn't switch as expected, ensure your shell is properly configured to integrate with pyenv. This usually involves adding pyenv initialization commands to your shell's configuration file. More details can be found on the [pyenv GitHub page](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv?tab=readme-ov-file#set-up-your-shell-environment-for-pyenv).

## How can I know the version of Python currently active in my shell?

To check the currently active Python version in your shell, you can use the command:

```bash
pyenv version
```

Alternatively, to find out the Python version and its location without relying on pyenv, the following commands can be useful:

```bash

# For the Python version
python --version

# For the location of the Python executable
which python
```

These commands are helpful for verifying that your project is running with the correct Python environment, ensuring compatibility and facilitating smooth development workflows.