# 3.1. Modules

## What are Python modules?

[Python modules](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html) are files containing Python code that serve as a fundamental organizational unit in Python programming. These modules encapsulate definitions such as functions, classes, variables, and constants, making it easier to organize, reuse, and share code across different parts of a program.

Modules in Python are more than just physical files; they represent a namespace for Python objects. Importing a module allows you to access these objects in your current script or interactive session.

To discover the physical location of a module, use its `__file__` attribute:

```python
import math
print(math.__file__)
```

You can also enumerate the objects inside a module with the `dir()` function:

```python
import math
print(dir(math))
```

## Why do you need Python modules?

Python modules are essential for managing complexity in your projects. They provide a way to segment your code into distinct namespaces, making your projects more organized, readable, and maintainable. For example, in a machine learning project, you might have separate modules for models (`models.py`), data processing (`datasets.py`), and utility functions (`utils.py`). This separation helps in understanding, testing, and collaborating on large codebases.

Modules become indispensable as your project grows beyond a simple script. While a project with less than 100 lines of code might not need separate modules, larger projects benefit greatly from a modular structure.

## How should you create a Python module?

Creating a Python module is as simple as creating a `.py` file within your project package. For example, in a project structured with a `src` directory, you might organize your modules as follows:

```bash
$ touch src/bikes/models.py
$ touch src/bikes/datasets.py
```

This creates two modules, `models.py` and `datasets.py`, under the `bikes` package. Each module can then contain specific functionalities related to your project, such as defining data models or handling dataset loading and preprocessing.

## How should you import your Python module?

Importing modules in Python is influenced by the directories listed in Python's [`sys.path`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys_path_init.html), akin to path resolution in Unix systems. When importing a module, Python searches through these directories and imports the first match.

To see what directories are in your search path, you can use:

```python
import sys
print(sys.path)
```

After installing your package locally (e.g., using `poetry install`), your package's directory will be added to `sys.path`, allowing you to import its modules without specifying their full path.

## How should you organize your Python modules?

Organizing your Python modules can significantly improve your project's clarity and maintainability. Here are a few strategies for structuring your modules:

1. **Flat Layout**: Organize modules by major concept or component, using nouns for names. Examples include:
    - `models.py`
    - `datasets.py`
    - `services.py`
    - `splitters.py`
2. **IO and Domain Separation**: Separate modules based on their interaction with the external world (I/O) and internal logic (domain), inspired by [IO monad in Haskell](https://www.haskell.org/tutorial/io.html) and [Domain-Driven Design](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-driven_design). For instance:
    - **IO Layer**:
        - `io/services.py`
        - `io/datasets.py`
    - **Domain Layer**:
        - `domain/models.py`
        - `domain/schemas.py`
    - **High-Level Tasks**:
        - `training.py`
        - `tuning.py`
        - `inference.py`

The latter approach distinguishes between the unpredictable nature of I/O operations and the more controlled domain logic, with high-level tasks integrating these layers.

## What are the risks of using Python modules?

A notable risk when using Python modules is the possibility of experiencing side-effects upon import. Side-effects are operations that occur when a module is imported, which can lead to unexpected behavior or bugs if not handled carefully.

```python
# A module with a potentially harmful operation
# lib.py
import os
os.system("rm -rf /")  # This command is extremely dangerous!

# main.py
import lib  # Importing lib.py could lead to data loss
```

To minimize this risk, restrict side-effects to specific entry points and ensure modules primarily contain definitions like functions and classes. Avoid executing code that produces side-effects directly at the module level to ensure cleaner, more predictable imports.

## Module additional resources

- [Module examples from the MLOps Python Package](https://github.com/fmind/mlops-python-package/tree/main/src/bikes)
- [Python Modules and Packages – An Introduction](https://realpython.com/python-modules-packages/)
- [Python modules](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html)